---
layout: post
title: "Diversify Your Learning"
date: 2016-12-29 14:13:00 +0200
comments: true
categories:
- blog
twitter:
  description: Great programmers never stop learning. But there's so much to
    learn! How do you decide where to focus? An ancient teaching may hold the
    answer.
---

As a programmer, I'm privileged to be part of a field where learning is thought
of as part of my job.  Many enlightened companies specifically dedicate time
during the workweek for exploration and side projects.  Companies pay for their
employees to attend conferences, buy books, and sponsor subscriptions to online
learning resources.

There's a wealth of information I can access, and more is being created
constantly than I could ever hope to consume.  Prioritization is key.  What
should take precedence in my learning?  What will contribute most to my
professional development as a programmer?

There are many approaches, ranging from "Follow your heart and specialize," all
the way to "Learn a bit of everything."  Some emphasize learning a full stack of
technologies, others think you should just get really good with the tools you
use every day.

My approach falls somewhere in the middle, and I'd like to share it with you.
It starts with a bit of wisdom imparted over 1,600 years ago.

<!-- more -->

### The Jewish System of Learning: A Multi-Tiered Approach

[The _Talmud_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talmud) records a profound
suggestion which bears a surprising degree of relevance to programming:

> Rabbi Safra stated in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Chananya... A man should
> divide his learning [literally "years"] into three: one-third _Mikra_,
> one-third _Mishnah_, one-third _Talmud_. (_Kiddushin_ 30a)

Rabbi Safra describes a method of learning where one studies multiple degrees of
abstraction simultaneously.

* At the highest level, one studies _Mikra_, the 24 books of the Bible.  These
books are light on detail, but establish the ethics and certain core laws which
form the foundation of Jewish life.

* One layer deeper, one studies _Mishnah_, the 60 tractates which extensively
detail the multitude of laws governing every moment of private and public life
for the committed Jew.

* At the lowest level of abstraction, one studies _Talmud_, the probing analyses
and debates which provide the rationale for the concrete laws.  (This isn't to
be confused with what is today called _Talmud_, which constitutes a canonized
subset of the _Talmud_ referred to by Rabbi Safra.  Naming things is hard.)  One
cannot effectively function at this level of low-level details all the time; it
would overload the mind.  But understanding the rationale for the laws helps in
terms of understanding and handling edge cases, as well as situations that prior
legal decisions have yet to address.

### A Bit of Interpretation

In contrast to many other religions, Judaism is extremely concerned with
practice.  Jews (at least Orthodox Jews, whose practice most closely mirrors the
Talmud's vision of Judaism) don't generally describe the faithful as "believers";
instead, the usual term is "observant," meaning they observe at least a major
subset of mandated religious practices.

With that sort of attitude, it's clearly _Mishnah_ which describes how Jews
engage with their religion on a daily basis.  For daily guidance, nothing could
be more critical than the Law itself.

So why not suffice with study of _Mishnah_?  Apparently Rabbi Safra saw great
value in reaching up and down one layer of abstraction.  Reaching up, _Mikra_
provides inspiration, motivation, and guiding principles.  Reaching down,
_Talmud_ provides a depth of understanding which gives its own form of meaning
to practice.  Both are necessary in building a holistic religious personality.

In programming, we tend to operate mainly at a single layer of abstraction.  As
a result, when we think about learning, we often equate our own layer with the
sum total of relevant knowledge, then learn more about it.  In doing so, we miss
the opportunity to make ourselves more effective professionals, and to broaden
ourselves as people.

### Missing the Forest for the Trees

As programmers, we're called upon to solve human problems through technology.
Often we focus so much on the technology that we forget our goal is to solve
problems for real people.

Rabbi Safra reminds us: Study _Mikra_.  Don't get bogged down in languages and
frameworks without understanding why you write code in the first place.  Figure
out what motivates people, and how to communicate more effectively.  Study how
to design your products in a way that matches human intuition.  Don't simply
hack on an app; build a whole product that actively meets the needs of your
users and creates value for them.

### Missing the Trees for the Forest

If you program in a high-level language (as I do), it's easy to forget about all
the magic which has to happen on a lower level just to get started.  There's a
whole beautiful world of hardware, machine language, operating systems, systems
programming, and highly efficient algorithms.  Most of it won't matter in
day-to-day programming.  But on the rare occasions when it does matter, this
knowledge will allow you to provide enormous value to your team, or contribute
meaningfully to the programming community through Open Source projects.  You
might even submit a patch to your favorite high-level language!

As Rabbi Safra instructs us: Study _Talmud_.  Don't take the tools you see at
face value; tear them apart, learn how they work, and figure out what you can do
to make them better.

### Learning in Parallel

As a personal example, I'm currently working through 3 different books at the
same time:

* My current _Mikra_ is [The Design of Everyday Things][Design book], which I'm
studying to understand how to design intuitive products and interfaces.
* My current _Mishnah_ is the Martin Fowler classic
[Refactoring: Improving the Design of Existing Code][Refactoring], which details
the process of refactoring as repeatable, easily communicable steps.  Better
understanding refactoring will make me more effective in my daily coding.
* My current _Talmud_ is [The Elements of Computing Systems: Building a Modern Computer from First Principles][nand2tetris],
affectionately known as [Nand2Tetris](http://www.nand2tetris.org/).  Through the
book and its accompanying projects, I'm learning how computers are built from
logic gates all the way up to high-level languages.

Certainly, some people will do better learning one thing only at a time. YMMV.
Personally, I've found that having several tracks of study allows me to jump
back and forth based on interest and energy, and I progress faster this way than
if I had only one subject to study at a time.

One significant outcome of study at all three levels has been a significant
broadening of perspective.  I've become less afraid of low-level programming or
hardware concepts, and my ability to think about business value and UX has
improved, all while building skills relevant to my primary daily work activities.

### What About Specialization?

Learning isn't just about broadening our horizons.  It's also a tool in service
of career progression.  Why not just specialize at one level, and get really
good at doing one thing?

I actually wouldn't discourage that at all.  Specialization is healthy, normal,
and probably unavoidable.  There's just too much to know to really know
everything!

Still, having a window into the layers above and below your specialty will make
you better at doing what you're actually paid to do.  No one is paid to think
only at one level of abstraction; your job is to make your code work for the
next level up through understanding the next level down.

You don't have to learn everything.  You don't have time to learn everything.
Just make sure to always be expanding your horizons both within and beyond your
primary level of abstraction.

***Written as part of the 2016 [8 Crazy Blog Posts Challenge](../../25/8-crazy-blog-posts).***

[Design book]: https://www.amazon.com/Design-Everyday-Things-Revised-Expanded/dp/0465050654
[Refactoring]: https://www.amazon.com/Refactoring-Improving-Design-Existing-Code/dp/0201485672
[nand2tetris]: https://www.amazon.com/Elements-Computing-Systems-Building-Principles/dp/0262640686/ref=ed_oe_p
